Add VASP documentation (#79)
eth-cscs/cscs-docs: docs/software/sciapps/vasp.md

Hybrid functionals that mix the Hartree-Fock approach with density functional theory are implemented as well.
Furthermore, Green's functions methods (GW quasiparticles, and ACFDT-RPA) and many-body perturbation theory (2nd-order Møller-Plesset) are available in VASP.

In VASP, central quantities, like the one-electron orbitals, the electronic charge density, and the local potential are expressed in plane wave basis sets.
The interactions between the electrons and ions are described using norm-conserving or ultrasoft pseudopotentials, or the projector-augmented-wave method.
To determine the electronic groundstate, VASP makes use of efficient iterative matrix diagonalisation techniques, like the residual minimisation method with direct inversion of the iterative subspace (RMM-DIIS) or blocked Davidson algorithms.
These are coupled to highly efficient Broyden and Pulay density mixing schemes to speed up the self-consistency cycle.

!!! note "Licensing Terms and Conditions"

>     Users are kindly asked to obtain their own license. CSCS cannot provide free access to the code and needs to inform VASP Software GmbH with an updated list of users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Access to VASP is restricted to users who have purchased a license from VASP Software GmbH.
    CSCS cannot provide free access to the code and needs to inform VASP Software GmbH with an updated list of users.
    Once you have a license, submit a request on the [CSCS service desk](https://jira.cscs.ch/plugins/servlet/desk) (with a copy of your license) to be added to the `vasp6` unix group, which will grant access to the `vasp` uenv.
    Please refer to the VASP web site for more information about licensing.
```

Reviewer: Then remove the two sentences below that?

"users are kindly asked" is indirect and a bit unctuous.

>     Therefore, access to precompiled VASP.6 executables and library files will be available only to users who have already purchased a VASP.6 license and upon request will become members of the CSCS unix group vasp6.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Therefore, access to precompiled `VASP.6` executables and library files will be available only to users who have already purchased a `VASP.6` license and upon request will become members of the CSCS unix group `vasp6`.
    
    To access VASP follow the [`Accessing Restricted Software`][ref-uenv-restricted-software] guide.
```
Do we have more details on how to become members of the `vasp6` group? (I feel we still get a considerable number of tickets about VASP access. Is there any way we can improve the situation by expanding the docs?)

Author: I'm not involved in the vasp6 group management, but from what I understand, Maria Grazia is the only one who can check the license. Therefore, any ticket with regards to VASP licenses should be handled by her.
Maybe we can ask the user to add a specific tag to make assignment quicker?

>     Please refer to the VASP web site for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Please refer to the [VASP web site](https://www.vasp.at) for more information.
```

> ## Alps - GH200
> 
> ### How to run

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Running VASP

### Running on the HPC platrofm
```

For consistency with NAMD and CP2K pages. We might have to provide this on Eiger, so that would be a separate section.

> A precompiled user environment containing VASP with MPI, OpenMP, OpenACC, HDF5 and Wannier90 support is available.
> Due to license restrictions, the VASP images are not directly accessible in the same way as other applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A precompiled uenv containing VASP with MPI, OpenMP, OpenACC, HDF5 and Wannier90 support is available.
Due to license restrictions, the VASP images are not directly accessible in the same way as other applications.
```

> For accessing VASP uenv images, please follow this guide: [`Accessing Restricted Software`][ref-uenv-restricted-software].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For accessing VASP uenv images, please see the guide to [accessing restricted software][ref-uenv-restricted-software].
```

> To load the VASP user environment:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To load the VASP uenv:
```

```bash
uenv start vasp/v6.5.0:v1 --view=vasp
```
The `vasp_std` , `vasp_ncl`  and `vasp_gam`  executables are now available for use.
Loading the uenv can also be directly done inside of a SLURM script.

```bash title="SLURM script for running VASP on a single node"
#!/bin/bash -l

#SBATCH --job-name=vasp
#SBATCH --time=24:00:00
#SBATCH --nodes=1
#SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=4
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task=16
#SBATCH --gpus-per-task=1

> #SBATCH --uenv=<VASP_UENV>

Reviewer: How about a concrete version here:
```
## replace with the specific version that you need
#SBATCH --uenv=vasp/6.5.0:v1
```

#SBATCH --view=vasp
#SBATCH --account=<ACCOUNT>
#SBATCH --partition=normal

export OMP_NUM_THREADS=$SLURM_CPUS_PER_TASK

srun vasp_std
```

!!! note
    It's recommended to use the SLURM option `--gpus-per-task=1`, since VASP may fail to properly assign ranks to GPUs when running on more than one node.
    This is not required when using the CUDA MPS wrapper for oversubscription of GPUs.

!!! note

>     VASP relies on CUDA aware MPI, which requires `MPICH_GPU_SUPPORT_ENABLED=1` to be set when using Cray MPICH. On the HPC platform including `daint`, this is set by default and does not have to be included in SLURM scripts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    VASP relies on CUDA-aware MPI, which requires `MPICH_GPU_SUPPORT_ENABLED=1` to be set when using Cray MPICH. On the HPC platform including `daint`, this is set by default and does not have to be included in SLURM scripts.
```
I think it would be good to leave this note, but still add the environment variable to the Slurm script. We decided to do the same for CP2K.

### Multiple Tasks per GPU
Using more than one task per GPU is possible with VASP and may lead to better GPU utilization.
However, VASP relies on [NCCL] for efficient communication, but falls back to MPI when using multiple tasks per GPU.
In many cases, this drawback is the greater factor and it's best to use one task per GPU.

To run with multiple tasks per GPU, a wrapper script is required to start a CUDA MPS service.
This script can be found at [NVIDIA GH200 GPU nodes: multiple ranks per GPU][ref-slurm-gh200-multi-rank-per-gpu].

```bash title="SLURM script for running VASP on a single node with two tasks per GPU"
#!/bin/bash -l

#SBATCH --job-name=vasp
#SBATCH --time=24:00:00
#SBATCH --nodes=1
#SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=8
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task=16
#SBATCH --uenv=<VASP_UENV>
#SBATCH --view=vasp
#SBATCH --account=<ACCOUNT>
#SBATCH --partition=normal

export OMP_NUM_THREADS=$SLURM_CPUS_PER_TASK

srun ./mps-wrapper.sh vasp_std
```

> ### Building from Source

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Building VASP from source
```

To build VASP from source, the `develop` view must first be loaded:
```
uenv start vasp/v6.5.0:v1 --view=develop
```

All required dependencies can now be found in `/user-environment/env/develop`.

> Note that shared libraries might not be found when executing vasp, if the makefile does not include additional rpath linking options or `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` has not been extended.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that shared libraries might not be found when executing VASP, if the makefile does not include additional rpath linking options or `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` has not been extended.
```

!!! warning
    The detection of MPI CUDA support does not work properly with Cray MPICH.
    After compiling from source, it's also required to set `export PMPI_GPU_AWARE=1` at runtime to disable the CUDA support check within VASP.
    Alternatively, since version 6.5.0, the build option `-DCRAY_MPICH` can be added to disable the check at compile time.
    The provided precompiled binaries of VASP are patched and do not require special settings.

> Examples for makefiles that set the necessary rpath and link options on GH200:

Reviewer 2: Out of curiosity, what is the status of the CMake build system?

Reviewer 2: Ok, thanks for the update.
